.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2025 Ryan Vogt <rvogt.ca@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd May 27, 2025
.Dt PWGEN 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pwgen
.Nd generate passwords from various character sets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm pwgen
.Op Fl adeHhnpsv
.Op Fl l Ar length
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility generates cryptographically secure, unbiased random passwords from the
ASCII character set, the alphanumeric character set, the hexadecimal character
set, the set of decimal digits, or a simplified character set designed for
ease of use on a U.S. QWERTY keyboard. The passwords generated will be
.Ar length
characters long.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a
Use the typeable portion of the ASCII character, excluding whitespace
characters, to generate the password. This set corresponds to the range 33-126
in the ASCII character set.
.It Fl d
Describe the password generation method specified on the command line,
including the number of bits of security it provides, instead of generating a
password.
.It Fl e
Use a simple character set designed for ease of use on a U.S. QWERTY keyboard
to generate the password, and enforce that it contains at least one uppercase
letter, one lowercase letter, one number, and one special character. This
enforcement is performed in a manner that does not bias the password. This
option is the default behaviour of
.Nm .
See the
.Fl s
option for more details about the simple character set.
.It Fl H
Use the uppercase hexadecimal character set to generate the password. This set
consists of numbers and the letters 'A' through 'F'.
.It Fl h
Use the lowercase hexadecimal character set to generate the password. This set
consists of numbers and the letters 'a' through 'f'.
.It Fl l Ar length
The password generated will consist of
.Ar length
characters. The default is 24 characters.
.It Fl n
Use the alphanumeric set to generate the password. This set consists of the
ASCII lowercase and uppercase letters and numbers.
.It Fl p
Use the ASCII numbers '0' through '9' to generate the password, which can
function as a PIN.
.It Fl s
Use a simple character set designed for ease of use on a U.S. QWERTY keyboard
to generate the password. This character set consists of all uppercase and
lowercase ASCII letters and numbers, and the special characters generated by
pressing shift while typing a number key. For greater clarity, 
.Dl ! \ @ \ # \ $ \ % \ ^ \ & \ * \ ( \  )
are the ten special characters.
.It Fl v
Print the version of
.Nm
to standard output and exit.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
To generate a 24-character password guaranteed to contain at least one
uppercase letter, one lowercase letter, one number, and one special character:
.Pp
.Dl $ pwgen
.Pp
To describe how many bits of security are provided by the password generated
above:
.Pp
.Dl $ pwgen -d
.Pp
To generate a four-digit PIN:
.Pp
.Dl $ pwgen -l 4 -p
.Pp
To generate a 12-character hexadecimal string:
.Pp
.Dl $ pwgen -l 12 -h
.Pp
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility was released in September 2007. In August 2011, it was rolled into the
.Xr pisces 1
software package.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pisces 1 ,
.Xr ascii 7
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Ryan Vogt Aq Mt rvogt.ca@gmail.com
